KEP-4010: Add HEAD Request Probes Support (#4012)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/4010-head-request-probes/README.md

### Non-Goals

- Modifying existing HTTP GET-based probes.
- Introducing new HTTP request methods beyond HEAD.

## Proposal

The proposal involves extending Kubernetes' readiness and liveness probes to support HTTP HEAD requests. This will involve modifying the Kubernetes API to allow users to specify the request method as HEAD for these probes. When a HEAD request is used, only the response headers will be retrieved, without the response body. This lightweight operation is ideal for checking the availability of resources without incurring unnecessary network traffic or consuming additional system resources.

For example, a pod's readiness probe configuration can be updated as follows:

```yaml
readinessProbe:
  httpHead:
    headers:
      - name: X-Custom-Header
        value: some-value
    queryParams:
      - name: token
        value: abc123
    path: /health
    port: 8080
    scheme: HTTPS
    timeoutSeconds: 3
    periodSeconds: 5
```

In this example, the readiness probe is configured to use an HTTP HEAD request with custom headers, query parameters, and a specific path, port, and scheme.

> There is an [untested solution how this feature might be implemented](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/commit/e3d556f0920ff736fec5df73c42f6db93f436a37), without the usage of a feature gate.

Reviewer: I think there should be a note that a feature gate (the one listed below, perhaps) will be needed in the final implementation

Author: Good point, I will add something like

```suggestion
There is an [untested solution how this feature might be implemented](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/commit/e3d556f0920ff736fec5df73c42f6db93f436a37).  
We need to ensure that a feature gate is added in the final implementation.
```

WDYT?

Reviewer: That works! The wording could also be
`Note: this solution is also missing a feature gate, which will be required for the final implementation`
I'm open either way

- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

This Kubernetes Enhancement Proposal (KEP) introduces the capability to use HTTP HEAD requests for defining readiness and liveness probes in Kubernetes pods. Currently, only GET requests are supported for probes, limiting the options for checking the health of containers. By allowing the use of HEAD requests, Kubernetes users will have more flexibility and finer-grained control over their probes, especially for customer-facing applications.

## Motivation

> The motivation behind this proposal is to enhance Kubernetes' readiness and liveness probes by supporting HTTP HEAD requests. While GET requests are commonly used, they might not always be suitable for certain scenarios, such as checking the availability of resources without fetching their content. The ability to use HEAD requests will enable more efficient health checks for specific use cases, particularly those involving customer-facing services. By extending the probe functionality, Kubernetes aims to provide a more versatile and customizable platform for managing container health.

Reviewer 2: I'd really want to see some specific cases where GET was untenable, but HEAD would have been OK, where there wasn't something else that could have been done differently.  I'm not saying it doesn't exist, but every API change needs to be justified.

What I mean is that there's a trivial workaround - run another container as a "probe proxy" which receives a GET and does a HEAD to the real backend.  This is about 10 lines of code.
 
It's not the most elegant approach, but it works.  Can we show even 3 or 4 cases where it was not viable?  Or heck, just show me a few real examples where this was necessary, which will at least make the argument that this isn't a solution to a problem nobody has.

Reviewer 3: #### Without HEAD

- Increases the cognitive load for developers as it is counter intuitive, that Kubernetes does support GET, but not HEAD
- Inefficient and waste of energy. In cases, where GET request return data in the body
- Not supporting HEAD can have cascading effects as apps, tests and documentation need to adjust to the limitations of Kubernetes
- According to the HTTP specification, HEAD would be the ideal candidate for probes

#### Explanation

I am a user of Kubernetes and I have used it now for several years. From my point of view the world looks a bit different.
As a user, I want to write apps which are maintainable and efficient. From my perspective Kubernetes should support me in my work. I don't want to create workarounds to get my work done.

HTTP is a standardized protocol. It uses methods such as GET, HEAD, POST etc. The intention of HEAD is to do the same job as GET, but: "**MUST NOT** send content in the response" [RFC 9110 - 9.3.2. HEAD](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9110#section-9.3.2). I would argue, that HEAD is the ideal HTTP method for Kubernetes probes, based on the RFC 9110 definition.

At [SecHub](https://github.com/mercedes-benz/sechub/) we were doing exactly that, we implemented a health check using HEAD. We did not and do not develop SecHub to **only** run on Kubernetes. Once, we started deploying SecHub to Kubernetes we discovered, that Kubernetes does not support probes via HEAD, therefore we added a [GET request](https://github.com/mercedes-benz/sechub/issues/378). The task itself was easy, but the consequences are annoying. Now, we had to write [tests](https://github.com/mercedes-benz/sechub/blob/develop/sechub-doc/src/test/java/com/mercedesbenz/sechub/restdoc/AnonymousCheckAliveRestDocTest.java) and [document](https://mercedes-benz.github.io/sechub/latest/sechub-restapi.html#section-ucrestdoc-uc-UC_039) both: HEAD and GET health checks. We need to account for that in our [OpenAPI definition](https://github.com/mercedes-benz/sechub/releases/download/v0.43.0-server/sechub-openapi3-0.43.0.json) and in our client library which is based on the OpenAPI definition. Basically, doubling the work for a simple endpoint.

Next, we introduced another app [SecHub PDS](https://github.com/mercedes-benz/sechub/issues/918). Same issue, we implemented HEAD, next we had to add the [GET method](https://github.com/mercedes-benz/sechub/issues/918).

Furthermore, it is counter intuitive to have GET available for probes, but not HEAD. Especially, because Kubernetes only cares about the HTTP response codes of the probe requests and not the body. It increases the cognitive load. First, one has to understand the HTTP protocol next one has to learn about the limitations of Kubernetes regarding possible HTTP methods in probes. I, for my part, much rather prefer to learn about the HTTP protocol as it helps me outside of Kubernetes.

Another issue is energy efficiency (green computing/ICT sustainability). In cases, where the health check returns more than just an empty body for GET requests, being able to use a HEAD request can limit the resource consumption. Without a HEAD request the body is send and received to be discarded. Truly wasteful.
Those bytes need to be processed and send around, which cost CPU cycles and requires memory. Probes, especially livnessProbes, are getting executed several thousand times per day and million times in a year (depending on the configuration). All that computational effort adds up. At the end it is just wasted energy for nothing.

Examples of applications which implement a health check with HEAD, but return the full HTML page are:

- https://try.gitea.io/
        
        # GET request
        curl https://try.gitea.io/ -> returns the login page

        # HEAD request
        curl --head https://try.gitea.io/
        HTTP/1.1 200 Connection established

        HTTP/2 200 
        date: Wed, 07 Jun 2023 18:01:29 GMT
        server: Caddy

- https://forum.gitlab.com/ (running [Discourse](https://www.discourse.org/))

        # GET request
        curl https://forum.gitlab.com/

        # HEAD request
        curl --head https://forum.gitlab.com/
        HTTP/1.1 200 Connection established

        HTTP/2 200 
        server: nginx
        date: Wed, 07 Jun 2023 19:06:49 GMT
        content-type: text/html; charset=utf-8
        vary: Accept-Encoding

Remarks:

- Not everybody is lucky enough to be able to talk openly about their application and provide you with real examples. Working on a FOSS project provides me that freedom.
- I am not the original author of the issue: [Support httpHead for pod livenessProbe #49937](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/49937), there are more users with a similar opinions

Reviewer 2: I appreciate the energy you put into this response, truly.  

We must also acknowledge that Kube's probe definitions are used by other systems such as clouds ( https://docs.aws.amazon.com/elasticloadbalancing/latest/classic/elb-healthchecks.html, https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/load-balancer/load-balancer-custom-probe-overview, https://cloud.google.com/run/docs/configuring/healthchecks, just to pick a few) and none of those support HEAD.  Others like nginx also seem to only support GET, but I didn't find definitive docs.

ON the other hand, fastly supports HEAD (https://docs.fastly.com/en/guides/working-with-health-checks) as does haproxy (https://www.haproxy.com/documentation/hapee/latest/service-reliability/health-checking/active-checks/check-HTTP-service/)

I'm afraid that it's not as wide-spread as you might think.  It's not that I don't want to make things easier, but none of this stuff is cost-free and in nearly 10 years, I have heard this request only a handful of times.  I added some thoughts on some of @sftim apt comments, too.

Reviewer 4: When I looked at cloud probes and saw the inconsistent `HEAD` support the counter argument for me was that some of them also do not support headers, while Kuberneetes does. Which makes this topic harder to reason about =)

I wanted to expand on the cost of supporting http HEAD. I don't worry about the engineering price that much. What bothers me is the supportability of HEAD probes. I saw a few issues when analyzing the response body of GET probe helped to find the problem with the probe - it was short circuited from some java servlet filter instead of reaching the actual GET routing. It is good when it short circuited to return error. But sometimes it will simply return 200 unconditionally rendering the probe useless. With HEAD - there is no body to analyze and troubleshooting will be hard. And I can see how HEAD may be misconfigured on different layers of the request routing leading to unexpected behaviors and support requests.

@Jeeppler what is your experience with HEAD probes supportability since you are using them? What do you use to confirm that HEAD probe ACTUALLY hits the callback that checks the app state?

For example, a pod's readiness probe configuration can be updated as follows:

```yaml
readinessProbe:
  httpHead:
    headers:
      - name: X-Custom-Header
        value: some-value
    queryParams:
      - name: token
        value: abc123
    path: /health
    port: 8080
    scheme: HTTPS
    timeoutSeconds: 3
    periodSeconds: 5
```

In this example, the readiness probe is configured to use an HTTP HEAD request with custom headers, query parameters, and a specific path, port, and scheme.

There is an [untested solution how this feature might be implemented](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/commit/e3d556f0920ff736fec5df73c42f6db93f436a37).  
Note: this solution is also missing a feature gate, which will be required for the final implementation.

### Risks and Mitigations

Introducing support for HTTP HEAD requests in probes may pose the following risks:

- Increased complexity: Adding support for HEAD requests may introduce additional complexity to the Kubernetes codebase. This risk can be mitigated through careful design and thorough testing.

> - Backward compatibility: Existing readiness and liveness probes that use GET requests may need to be updated to utilize the new HEAD functionality. Documentation and upgrade guides can help users transition smoothly.

Reviewer 5: This doesn't sound like backward-compatibitibility issue.
If you want to use new functionality, sure you need to change your configs.

The most important thing (and this is what is backward compatibility) is to ensure that users who don't want the HEAD functionality aren't forced to any changes - everything has to remain working for them as is.

Author: You are totally right. I think we can drop this paragraph completely.

Reviewer 4: please do

5. Modify the Kubernetes health check mechanism to handle HEAD requests appropriately, including parsing the response and determining the pod's health based on the HEAD response status code.

### Test Plan

The following tests should be performed to ensure the proper functioning of the new HEAD request support:

#### Prerequisite testing updates

- Update existing tests for readiness and liveness probes to include scenarios using HEAD requests.

#### Unit tests

- Add unit tests to verify the correct handling of HEAD requests in the Kubernetes API server and Kubelet components.
- Test the behavior of the probes when HEAD requests are used.

#### Integration tests

- Perform integration tests to validate the interoperability of the updated components with other Kubernetes functionality.
- Verify the correct behavior of HEAD-based probes in various scenarios, including failures and recoveries.

#### e2e tests

- Create end-to-end tests that cover the entire lifecycle of pods with HEAD-based probes.
- Validate the behavior of probes in real-world scenarios, ensuring they function as expected.

### Graduation Criteria

> The support for HEAD requests in readiness and liveness probes will undergo the following graduation stages:

Reviewer 4: criteria typically include level of testing and level of adoption we expect to promote the feature between stages

Author: Updated the graduation criteria according analogues KEP 3695

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

Before enabling support for HTTP HEAD requests in readiness and liveness probes in a production environment, the following aspects will be assessed through a readiness review questionnaire:

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

- What flags or configuration settings are required to enable the new feature?

A feature flag `HeadRequestProbes` will be introducded.

- Can the feature be disabled or rolled back if issues arise?

Yes.

- Are there any specific considerations for enabling or disabling the feature on a live cluster?

No.

### Rollout, Upgrade, and Rollback Planning

- What is the recommended rollout strategy for enabling the new feature?

Update to the version which has the new feature implemented and enable the feature gate.

- Are there any specific considerations or steps to follow during the rollout process?

No.

- Are there any backward compatibility concerns to address during the rollout?

> No.

Reviewer 6: Is that right?

(How would someone roll back if they have defined HTTP `HEAD` probes on existing Pods or Pod templates?)

Reviewer 2: This is a very real issue - it's not at all uncommon to have nodes on a back-rev release vs. apiserver.

One option is "too bad, so sad, upgrade your nodes" - we can't even easily notify you (I suppose we could throw evens or something we we found a probe, but it had no mechanism defined, but I don't think we do that today).

Another is to bend the API so that "use HEAD" is an extension of the existing HTTP mechanism (sadly named "httpGet"), so old kubelets could fall back on GET.

Reviewer 4: I think they will see the error: 

https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/4706516100649bf5a92c780488ea53924239ad17/pkg/kubelet/prober/prober.go#L181-L182

So discoverability will be OK

Reviewer 6: We might at least want to document the rollback if the KEP reached beta.

### Dependencies

- Are there any dependencies on other Kubernetes features, components, or external systems?

No.

- Are there any specific version requirements for these dependencies?

No.

### Scalability

- How does the new feature impact the scalability of Kubernetes clusters?

It does not impact the scalability.

- Are there any scalability considerations or limitations to be aware of?

No.

### Troubleshooting

- What are the common issues or failure scenarios related to the new feature?

That the HEAD endpoint is not implemented at the application (obvious).

- What troubleshooting steps can be taken to diagnose and resolve these issues?

Request the health endpoint with a HEAD request directly.

- Are there any recommended logs or diagnostic information that should be collected for troubleshooting purposes?

No.

## Implementation History

- 16-05-2023: Proposal drafted.

## Drawbacks

The introduction of support for HTTP HEAD requests in readiness and liveness probes may have the following drawbacks:

- Increased Complexity: The new feature may add complexity to the Kubernetes codebase, potentially affecting maintenance and troubleshooting efforts.

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 4: one alternative is to ask app developer to implement `GET` endpoint that doesn't have a body. Functionally it will be the same, would it? Please describe why having http head built-in is a better solution.

Author: Jeremias described it in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4012#discussion_r1222067773
